Hi. It's Mr. Andersen and welcome
to biology essentials video 33. This is on
genotypes and phenotypes and how changes in
genotype can affect changes in the phenotype.
You should know what both of those are. Genotypes
are going to be the letters of the DNA. Or
the genes inside you. Phenotype are going
to be the physical characteristics that you
have. And so an analogy could be the letters
that we put in a book is like the genotype.
But the story would be like phenotype. And
so I've written a sentence right here which
probably means nothing to you. Let's turn
to the next page of this text. And we'll see
that we now can see the word the, but still
doesn't really mean anything to you. But now
let's turn to the third page and we can actually
see a story starting to emerge. "The fat cat
ate the rat." And so the letters would be
like the genotypes. But the phenotype is going
to be the story. And so when you look at me
what you see is phenotype. You see that I
have blues. You see that my nose looks like
this. But what you don't see are the letters
behind that. Now if you're really paying attention
on those first two pages, you actually could
have seen the message there. So let's turn
back for just a second. And so this is that
first one. And it doesn't make sense when
you look at it. And that's because the whole
thing has been frame shifted. In other words
if I were to put a letter in right here. The
. . . you'll also see the fat cat ate the
rat shows up as well. And so this is a mutation.
If we ever have a change in here, so this
would be a deletion. So we deleted a letter,
it shifts everything over one. Or if I were
to go to the next one. What kind of a mutation
do we have here? Well, now we've got the but
now we've added this letter E. And so we've
inserted that. And so if I get rid of that
I can still see the fat cat ate the rat start
to emerge as well. And so changes in the letter
have huge implications when it comes to the
story. And likewise, in us, changes to the
DNA can affect our phenotypes or physically
what we look like. Those are played against
our environment. And that's called natural
selection. And so let me summarize what I'm
going to talk about. Genotypes and phenotypes
and mostly how changes in the genotype can
affect phenotype. Now what are genotypes made
up of? They're simply made up of DNA. And
so how do we change the DNA? Or how do we
get errors in the DNA? Well there's essentially
two ways that we can do that. The major source
of errors comes from damage to the DNA or
mistakes in DNA replication. We call those
things mutations. They're played against the
environment. And some of them are actually
beneficial. Some of them are harmful. And
some of them are none of the above. They're
neutral. There's other ways that we can get
errors in our DNA as well. We can have errors
in the cell cycle. So when we're actually
making copies of cells or when we're making
sex cells we can have errors in that. That
can eventually lead to new phenotypes which
can be good. I'll talk about bread wheat and
can be bad. I'll talk about a mule. And it
can also lead to human disorders. A famous
one that probably you're familiar with is
Down Syndrome. And so these are all simply
changes in the DNA. But those eventually cause
changes in the phenotypes. And so let me give
you an example of that. One of the most famous
ones that we always talk about as biology
teachers is sickle cell anemia. And so if
you have sickle cell anemia, this would be
a regular red blood cell like that. If you
have sickle cell anemia you have a red blood
cell that looks like that or this sickle kind
of appearance. Now it leads to a lot of other
problems within your body. But it's simply
a change in one letter. And how could a change
in one letter in the DNA cause this huge change
in the blood cell itself? Well let's think
about DNA for just a second. Let me actually
clear this off and get a better color. And
so DNA has two strands remember. This top
strand would actually be called an nonsense
strand or the non-reading strand. And then
this bottom one is going to be called the
sense or the reading strand. And so if you
look right here, there's a G on one side of
the DNA. That means there's a C on the other
side, or there's a complimentary strand. And
so those three letters will code in messenger
RNA. So this would be transcription right
here. Code for these three letters over here.
Which codes for this one amino acid. And so
when you're making hemoglobin inside blood,
that's how we get this first valine is going
to be this first amino acid inside hemoglobin.
And if we trace down, as long as the letters
stay the same, we're going to have the same
amino acids. But if you have sickle cell anemia,
you have a mistake right here. You have a
mistake in this first amino acid. It ends
up changing the chemistry of that amino acid.
Therefore it changes the whole structure of
the protein and can lead to this sickle cell.
And the interesting thing is that that's passed
on. Because that's what you pass on as your
DNA to your kids, generation after generation.
And so that's been passed on and selected
for or against. And that's how changes in
the letters of the DNA, any kind of mistake
in this letter, leads eventually to changes
in the amino acids. Changes in the phenotypes.
So how do these mutations come to be? Well
we make mistakes. And so when we're going
to copy one strand of DNA and make two. So
during the cell cycle, when we want a cell
to divide, DNA polymerase will make a really
perfect copy of that DNA. But occasionally
it will make mistakes. And so maybe there's
a T over on this side instead of making a
T it actually makes a C on this side. And
so we can get mistakes just from copying,
or DNA replication in DNA polymerase. We can
also get mutations through radiation. Be it
like gamma radiation or UV radiation. That
can cause changes in the letters as well.
And we can also get it in chemicals. And so
we find if something is a carcinogen, for
example it's a cancer causing agent, good
example would be like diesel fumes is a carcinogen,
but how does it make cells cancerous? It's
affecting their DNA. And it's making them
so they keep reproducing out of control. And
so these are all ways that we can get mutations.
And there are other ways we can get mutations
as well. But these mutations are then played
against their environment. And we could group
those mutations into three different types.
If you've got a neutral mutation that means
we've changed the DNA, but it doesn't effect
the organism. How could that be? Well remember
in eukaryotes a lot of our DNA actually doesn't
contain genes. It's areas between the genes.
And so neutral mutations are not going to
effect the protein or they're going to effect
the protein so little that it really doesn't
effect the phenotype. Now the reason I put
a clock down here is that we can actually
use these neutral mutations and we can make
what's called a biological or an evolutionary
clock. Because mutations occur at a specific
rate. And so we can look at how many mutations
have arisen. We can actually see how long
ago it was that the two organisms, for example
shared a common ancestor. We can also have
mutations that are then beneficial. In other
words they help an organism. One of my favorite
types of beneficial mutations, we really started
to study just fairly recently, and that is
mutation in the, so this would be in the helper
T cell, it's in a protein found in helper
T cells. And so it's a deletion. So that's
going to be when we're missing a section of
that gene. And if you are normal your CCR5.
But if you have this mutation you have delta
32 mutation or a change in that gene. Why
is it beneficial? Well if you have this gene,
or better yet two copies of this gene, you
can't be infected by HIV or human immunodeficiency
virus. In other words there's something different
in the structure of that helper T cell so
this virus can't gain entry. What's interesting
about this is it's most prevalent in Europeans.
We don't find it at all in Africans or Asians
for the most part. And so that suggests to
us that it was selected. And so when scientists
started looking they found that this offered
protection against either bubonic plague or
small pox. And now is providing protection
for descendants of the people who first came
up with this mutation. And so it helped them
a long time ago. And it helps them today.
So that would be a beneficial. However, most
of the mutations are going to be harmful.
Harmful to that individual. And if it's in
the germ cells, harmful to generations that
come after that. And I wrote 70% and 7%. And
what that means is that if the mutation occurs
within a gene, 70% of the time that change
within the gene is going to cause a harmful
mutation. If it's outside the gene, only 7%
of the time it is. An example of one would
be PKU. PKU is an inherited disease. It's
a recessive disease, so you have to get two
copies of it. But if you have phenylketonuria
and they test all babies for this, you can't
break down or you can't do well with a diet
that's rich in phenylalanine. And so they
have to accommodate for that. They change
your diet. And so it's a harmful mutation.
And this was discovered just in the last century.
And so when we weren't testing for this, babies
that were born, their diet actually was killing
them. A normal diet. So that would be an example
of a harmful mutation. We can also have mistakes
not only in the copying or duplication of
DNA, but in the cell cycle. And so what I've
drawn right here is meiosis. Meiosis is how
we make sperm and egg. How do we go from a
diploid cell eventually to a haploid cell?
So you'd think of this making sperm or making
eggs. We can also have mistakes in here. And
a lot of these mistakes will actually occur
during meiosis one. These chromosomes will
fail to separate. And so eventually what you
get on this side are, instead of having ones
that are haploid, you'll actually have some
that could even be 4n or 3n or 2n on this
side. Usually when we have sperm or egg that
have the wrong number of chromosomes that
leads to a zygote that just doesn't go anywhere.
Or it's not viable. But sometimes it can lead
to a new species. And so bread wheat, or the
wheat that we use to make bread, some of that
wheat is actually tetraploid or hexaploid.
They've got extra sets of chromosomes. And
that can actually lead to vigor. In plants,
a large number of plants are actually made
through mistakes in the DNA. Mistakes in the
cell cycle. It can also lead to sterility.
And so you probably know that a mule is when
you have a female donkey and a male horse.
And they're sterile. And the reason why is
that a male horse is going to have 64 chromosomes.
And donkey is going to have 62 chromosomes.
And so a mule is going to have 63 or an odd
number of chromosomes. It's hard for them
to make a viable sperm or egg. I think there
has been one case of a female, a few cases
of female mules actually giving birth to foals.
But it's really, really rare. And so that
can lead to sterility. It can also, these
changes in meiosis can lead to disorders.
A famous example of that is the Down Syndrome.
And so this would be a karyotype or a picture
of all the chromosomes in an individual. In
this case it would be a female because there
are two X chromosomes. But it you look at
here, with an individual who has Down Syndrome,
you'll notice that they actually had three
21st chromosomes. Now what does that lead
to? A lot of the characteristics of a person
who has Down Syndrome, development is going
to be slow. Sometimes they'll have a problem
with speech. And the reason why is that a
lot of those things are linked to proteins
that are on the 21st chromosome. It's not
a disorder. If you know somebody who has Down
Syndrome, they live a really normal life and
they can be some of the best people you ever
meet. But mistakes in this can eventually
lead to genetic problems. On this map right
here I'm showing how natural selection is
actually played out. And so at the beginning
remember I was talking about hemoglobin and
how sickle cell anemia can lead to awful things.
The neat thing that it can lead to is also
the ability to not get malaria. And so this
map on the left side is where malarial mosquitoes
are found. On the right side it shows the
incidence of sickle cell anemia. And so we're
going to find a higher rate of sickle cell
anemia in especially sub-Saharan Africa. And
the reason why is that it created sickle cell
anemia which was bad, but the beneficial mutation
has allowed them not to get malaria, which
is a huge selective pressure in Africa. And
so that's genotypes. That's phenotypes. And
I hope that's helpful.